README.md, before:

# Understanding Canada's Housing Crisis: Drivers of Supply, Demand, and Price

*A Decision Intelligence Analysis of SDG 11 - Sustainable Cities and Communities*

By: Logan Pugsley

## Executive Summary

This project examines Canada's housing crisis from the perspective of UN Sustainable Development Goal 11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities). Using open data that contains relevant data for various housing indicators and inputs, we aim to identify the key factors driving housing affordability, supply, and demand. Our analysis will use various data analytics, data visualization, and decision intelligence techniques to uncover insights about housing market trends, affordability gaps, and potential policy interventions.

[Read detailed background information here](Background.md)

## Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
1. New Housing Price Index
   - Value: The New Housing Price Index provides a clear measure of how much the contractors who build new residential homes are selling their buildings for. It helps to identify impacts from construction materials and the total costs to build a home.
   - Indicates contractors' selling prices of new residential homes
   - Monthly series that measures changes over time
   - Detailed specifications pertaining to each house remain the same between two consecutive periods of measurement
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Monthly
      - Range: January 1981 - Present

2. Housing Affordability Index (HAI)
   - Value: The Housing Affordability Index (HAI) provides a clear measure of how affordable housing is relative to income levels. It helps identify whether housing costs are sustainable for the average household.
   - Measures the share of disposable income that a median-income household puts toward housing-related expenses
   - Ratio of housing-related costs (mortgage payments and utility fees) to average household disposable income
   - The higher the ratio, the more difficult it is to afford a home
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Quarterly
      - Range: 1983 Q3 - Present

3. Percentage Change in Construction Materials Cost
   - Value: The percentage change for the cost of construction materials provides a measure to indicate if prices for raw materials used in housing construction are rising or falling. It helps to identify if construction costs are contributing to higher or lower housing prices.
   - Construction costs are a key determinant for the supply of housing
   - The higher the percentage change from year-to-year, the higher the price of construction materials in that year
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Annually
      - Range: 2011 - Present

4. Yearly Population Growth
   - Value: The yearly population growth measures how much Canada's population grows each year. It helps to identify if there are more or less people in the housing market in Canada.
   - Population growth is a key determinant for the demand of housing
   - The higher the population growth, the higher the anticipated demand for housing should be
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Annually
      - Range: 1945 - Present

5. Total Housing Investment
   - Value: The total housing investment measures how much capital is being allocated and spent to grow and update Canada's housing market. It can be a lagging indicator to measure how the supply for housing could increase in future periods.
   - Housing investment is another key determinant for the supply of housing
   - The higher the total housing investment, the more new housing and converted housing developments should be available on the market
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Annually
      - Range: 2017 - Present


## Analysis of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
![Housing KPIs](img/KPIs.png)

<a href="https://public.tableau.com/shared/QB97NQF53?:display_count=n&:origin=viz_share_link">
    <img src="img/view-on-tableau-public.png" alt="View on Tableau Public" height="30" >
</a>

Commit message:

Update README and other visualizations

README.md, after:

# Understanding Canada's Housing Crisis: Drivers of Supply, Demand, and Price

*A Decision Intelligence Analysis of SDG 11 - Sustainable Cities and Communities*

By: Logan Pugsley

## Executive Summary

This project examines Canada's housing crisis from the perspective of UN Sustainable Development Goal 11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities). Using open data that contains relevant data for various housing indicators and inputs, we aim to identify the key factors driving housing affordability, supply, and demand. Our analysis will use various data analytics, data visualization, and decision intelligence techniques to uncover insights about housing market trends, affordability gaps, and potential policy interventions.

[Read detailed background information here](Background.md)

## Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
1. New Housing Price Index (NHPI)
   - Value: The New Housing Price Index provides a clear measure of how much the contractors who build new residential homes are selling their buildings for. It helps to identify impacts from construction materials and the total costs to build a home.
   - Indicates contractors' selling prices of new residential homes
   - Monthly series that measures changes over time
   - Detailed specifications pertaining to each house remain the same between two consecutive periods of measurement
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Monthly
      - Range: January 1981 - Present

2. Housing Affordability Index (HAI)
   - Value: The Housing Affordability Index (HAI) provides a clear measure of how affordable housing is relative to income levels. It helps identify whether housing costs are sustainable for the average household.
   - Measures the share of disposable income that a median-income household puts toward housing-related expenses
   - Ratio of housing-related costs (mortgage payments and utility fees) to average household disposable income
   - The higher the ratio, the more difficult it is to afford a home
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Quarterly
      - Range: 1983 Q3 - Present

3. Percentage Change in Construction Materials Cost
   - Value: The percentage change for the cost of construction materials provides a measure to indicate if prices for raw materials used in housing construction are rising or falling. It helps to identify if construction costs are contributing to higher or lower housing prices.
   - Construction costs are a key determinant for the supply of housing
   - The higher the percentage change from year-to-year, the higher the price of construction materials in that year
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Annually
      - Range: 2011 - Present

4. Yearly Population Growth
   - Value: The yearly population growth measures how much Canada's population grows each year. It helps to identify if there are more or less people in the housing market in Canada.
   - Population growth is a key determinant for the demand of housing
   - The higher the population growth, the higher the anticipated demand for housing should be
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Annually
      - Range: 1945 - Present

5. Total Housing Investment
   - Value: The total housing investment measures how much capital is being allocated and spent to grow and update Canada's housing market. It can be a lagging indicator to measure how the supply for housing could increase in future periods.
   - Housing investment is another key determinant for the supply of housing
   - The higher the total housing investment, the more new housing and converted housing developments should be available on the market
   - Technical Details
      - Frequency: Annually
      - Range: 2017 - Present


## Analysis of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
![Housing KPIs](img/KPIs.png)

<a href="https://public.tableau.com/shared/QB97NQF53?:display_count=n&:origin=viz_share_link">
    <img src="img/view-on-tableau-public.png" alt="View on Tableau Public" height="30" >
</a>

1. New Housing Price Index (NHPI)
   The NHPI fluctuates over time with the economy and housing market, however significant spikes were observed in both 2006 and in 2021, indicating rapid price increases during those periods. In 2008, during the global financial crisis, a notable decrease was seen in the NHPI, indicating that prices decreased greatly in that period. There is a slight decrease in 2023/2024 coming out of the Covid-19 global pandemic, but not as drastic of a return as seen in 2008. Overall, this KPI indicates that external factors, like economic recessions and housing policy changes have influences on housing prices.

2. Housing Affordability Index (HAI)
   The HAI is another index that fluctuates over time, but indicates how much a median-income household spends toward housing-related costs compared to their overall income. Generally, financial planners suggest that households put approximately 30% of their disposable income towards housing, to be able to live financially stable. As indicated in the visualization, from 1995 to 2019, the HAI hovered around 30%, however, since 2020 there have been sharp increases, reaching as much as 55%. This indicates that households across Canada are being forced to pay more for their housing, leaving them less disposable income to pay for groceries, entertainment, and save for their long-term financial goals.

3. Percentage Change in Construction Materials Cost
   The visualization for the percentage change in construction materials cost shows rapid prices increases in 2020 and 2021 as the Covid-19 pandemic created a major supply chain disruption for raw materials. Interestingly, this increase correlates to the exact same time that both the the NHPI and the HAI saw tremendous increases, indicating that the price of construction materials is a key driver for both the supply of housing, and the price of that supply. These higher construction material costs have contributed to increased housing prices, making new construction and housing affordability key issues inside of Canada's housing crisis.

4. Yearly Population Growth
   For the 80 years shown on the yearly population growth visualization, Canada has seen relatively steady increases to its population, as it encourages immigration for people to move to the wonderful country. After decades of stability, there was a massive spike in Canada's population beginning in 2023, with over one million newcomers to Canada each year. This population growth was driven and encouraged by changes to the Government of Canada's immigration policies. Although population growth can be a good way to help grow economies, in terms of Canada's housing crisis, the rapid population increases seen since 2023 have dramatically increased housing demand, putting extreme pressure on an already weak supply of housing, thus increasing prices and affecting affordability.

5. Total Housing Investment
   The total housing investment indicator's visualization shows steady increases in investment over time in Canada's housing market, with a notable increase since 2020. This trend indicates that although there are affordability concerns for construction materials, money is still flowing into the housing market. This increased investment could indicate various efforts to address supply shortages for housing, but still may not be enough to meet increased demand and offset affordability challenges.


[For more visualizations currently in draft, click here](analysis/Visualizations.md)
